# CS 245

- Natural Language

## Propositional Logic
**Logic** is the systematic study of the principles of reasoning and inference.
- Used for modeling computer hardware, software, and embedded systems.
- Designing systems that can apply reason and inferences (artificial intelligence)

A **proposition** is a declarative sentence that is either **true** or **false**.


## English to Propositional Logic

$\lnot p$: not p, it is not the case of p

$p \land q$: p and q, p but q, not only p but q, p while q, p despite q, p yet q, p although q

$p \lor q$: p or q, p and/or q, p unless q

$p \implies q$: if p then q, q if p, p only if q, q when p, p is sufficient for q, q is necessary for p

$p \iff q$: p if and only if q, p is equivalent to q, p exactly if q, p is necessary and sufficient for q

A logic is formalized for syntax, semantics, and proof procedures.

## Syntax
Atomic propositions are combined into compound propositions, and are analyzed as a set of interrelated propositions.

**Propositions** are represented by formulas which contains a sequence of symbols. An **expression** is a finite sequence of symbols.
- Propositional variables - Denoted with lowercase Roman letters
- Connectives - Logic operators (NOT, AND, OR)
- Punctuation - Brackets

**Binary** connectives (AND, OR, IMPLIES) apply to two things.
**Unary** connectives (NOT) are only applied to one.

A **formula** can be built from a set of proposition variables.
A formula can be atom, negation, conjunction, disjunction, implication. It should only take on the type of the outermost type.

**Example**:
$(p \land q) \implies r$ is an implication.

## Semantics
The **semantics** of a logic describes how to interpret the well-formed formulas of the logic.

A **truth valuation** is a function with the set of all proposition symbols as domain and assigns a truth value (T,F) to each propositional variable.

For example $t(p) = p^t = T$

Everything can be built from the nand symbol. (see computer boolean)

To prove theorems, mathematical induction is used.

**Principle of Mathematical Induction:**

Establish that the base case has a property $P$. Show that if the property holds for the base case, the next number also holds the property. Conclude that the property holds for all $n \in N,n \geq BC$

**Theorem**: Let $R$ be a property, suppose that

1. for each atomic formula $p$, we have $R(p)$
2. For each formula $\alpha$, if $R(\alpha)$ then $R((\lnot \alpha))$
3. For each pair of formulas $\alpha$ and $n$, and each connective $*$, if $R(\alpha)$ and $R(n)$, then $R((\alpha * n))$.

This is called **structural induction**.

## Something happened here

## Working with Formulas

A formula $\alpha$ is a **tautology** if and only if for every truth valuation $t$, $\alpha^t = T$

A formula $\alpha$ is a **contradiction** if and only if for every truth valuation $t$, $\alpha^t=F$. Example: $p \land \lnot p$

A formula $\alpha$ is **satisfiable** if and only if there is some truth valuation $t$, such that $\alpha^t=T$

**Note:** A formula is satisfiable if and only if it is not a contradiction.

A **valuation tree** is a shortcut to analyzing what would happen if the entire truth table was filled out.

Two formulas are **equivalent**, $\alpha \equiv \beta$ if $\alpha^t = \beta^t$ for every valuation $t$.

**Lemma:** Suppose that $\alpha \equiv \beta$. Then for any formula $\gamma$, and any connective $*$, the formula $\alpha * \gamma$ and $\beta * \gamma$ are equivalent.

$$\alpha * \gamma \equiv \beta * \gamma*$$


**Example:** Prove
$(p \land q) \lor (q \land r) \equiv (q \land (p \lor r))$

**Proof**:
$= (p \land q) \lor (q \land r)$

$= (q \land p) \lor (q \land r)$

$= (q \land (p \lor r))$


**Simplify**: $p \lor (p \land q)$

**Solution:**

$= (p \land T) \lor (p \land q)$

$= p \land (T \lor q)$

$=p$

## Class

Prove $\lnot(((\lnot p \lor q) \lor r) \land \lnot r \land p) \lor q$

**Example:** Prove or disprove $p \equiv p \land (q \implies p)$

$p \land (q \implies p)$

$p \land (q \lor \lnot p)$ Implication

$p \land (\lnot p \lor q)$ Commutativity

$p$ Simplification II

LHS=RHS

**Example:** Prove or disprove $p \land (\lnot (\lnot q \land \lnot p) \lor p) \equiv q$

**Solution:** Find an counter example. Select $t(p) = F, t(q) = T$. LHS = F, RHS = T

Alternatively, simplify first if a value cannot be found by inspection.

$p \land ((q \lor p) \lor p)$

$p \land (q \lor (p \lor p))$

$p \land (q \lor p)$

$p \land (p \lor q)$

$p$

## Logical Consequence

Let $\sigma$ be a set of formulas and let $\phi$ be a formula. We say that

- $\phi$ is a logical consequence of $\sigma$ or
- $\sigma$ semantically entails $\phi$, or
- in symbols, $\sigma |= \phi$

if and and only if for any truth value $t$

$$\sigma^t = T \implies\phi^t = T$$

**Example:**

$$\{(p \implies q),q\} |= q$$

**Solution:** Whenever $\{(p \implies q),q\}$, $q$ must be true. This can be shown from drawing a truth table.

**Example:** $\{p \implies q, q\} |\not= p$

**Solution:** When $p = F,q = T$, and the proposition does not hold.


**Example:**
$$\{(p \implies q), (q \implies r)\} |= (r \implies q)$$

**Solution:** Draw huge truth table. $p=F,q=F,r=T$ has $\sigma^t = T$ and $\phi^t = F$

**Note:** If $\sigma$ is a contradiction, $\sigma |= \phi$ will always be true.

## Dealing with Code

If statement fragments can be simplified by drawing a truth table and taking the simplest expressions. The **else** block should be the largest block to avoid writing extra code.

##

Formulas $\alpha \implies \beta$ and $\lnot\alpha \lor \beta$ are equivalent.
Thus $\implies$ is said to be **definable** in terms of $\lnot$ and $\lor$.

There are sixteen possible binary connectives. (16 because there are 16 way to permutate T and F over the truth table containing 4 slots. Two are nullary (ignores the value they connect), and four others are unary (ignore one value but not the other).

A set of connectives is **adequate** iff any $n$-ary $(n\geq 1)$ connective can be defined in terms of ones in the set.

$(\lor,\land,\lnot)$ is an adequate set of connectives.

$(\land,\lnot)$,$(\lor,\lnot)$,$(\implies,\lnot)$ are adequate sets of connectives.

## Section

A **proof** is a formal demonstration that a statement is true. I

- It must be mechanically checkable. Intuition and insight should not be necessary.
- Any computer could verify its correctness

A proof is generally syntactic, rather than semantic. Permits mechanical checking. Rules chosen for semantic reasons.

A proof consists of a list of formulas. Assumption $\rightarrow$ inference $\rightarrow$ inference rules $\rightarrow$ conclusion.

A set of inference rules defines a **proof system**.

We notate "there is a proof with assumptions $\sum$ and conclusion $\phi$" by $\sum \vdash \phi$

An inference rule is written as

$$\frac{a_1\qquad a_2 \cdots a_i}{\beta}$$

This means, suppose each formula in $\alpha$ already appears in the proof (either assumed or previously inferred), then one may infer the formula $\beta$

Example $\frac{\alpha \, \beta}{\alpha \land \beta}$

## Approaches to Proofs

Direct proof. Establish $\sum \vDash \phi$. Give a proof with $\alpha_1,\alpha_2,\dots,\alpha_n$ as assumptions and obtain $\phi$ as conclusion.

Refutations (indirect proofs, proof by contradiction)

Establish $\sum \vDash \phi$. Assume $\lnot \phi$ and $\alpha_1,\alpha_2,\dots,\alpha_n$ and obtain a contradiction as conclusion. This works because any valuation that makes $\sum$ true must make $\lnot \phi$ false and make $\phi$ true.

**Resolution** is a refutation system with the following influence rule.

$\frac{a \lor p \,\, \lnot p \land b}{a \lor b}$

for any variable $p$ and formula $a$ and $b$.

Consider the following as special cases

Unit Resolution $\frac{a \lor p\qquad \lnot p}{a}$

Contradiction: $\frac{p\qquad \lnot p}{\text{Contradiction}}$

## Resolution

To prove $\{p,q\}_{\text{res}} p \land q$, derive a contradiction from the assumptions $\{p,q,\lnot(p\land q)\}$

Conjunctive normal form


- A **literal** is a (propositional) variable or the negation of a variable
- A **clause** is a disjunction of literals (cannot use and)
- A formula is in **conjunctive normal form** if it is a conjunction of clauses.

A formula is in CNF if and only if

- its only connectives are $\lnot, \lor, \land$
- $\lnot$ applies only to variables
- $\lor$ applies only to subformulas with no occurrence of $\land$.

To prove  $\phi$ from $\sum$ via resolution refutation

- Convert each formula in $\sum$ to CNF
- Convert $\lnot \phi$ to CNF
- Split the CNF formulas as the $\land$s, yielding a set of clauses
- From the resulting set of clauses, keep applying the resolution inference rule until
    + The empty clause (contradiction) results ($\phi$ is a theorem)
    + The rule cannot be applied to give a new formula ($\phi$ is not a theorem)

---------------------------------------------------

TODO: Resolution (2 classes)


## Predicate Logic | First Order Logic

Propositional logic dealt with logical forms of compound propositions that talked about all objects in a set. Predicate logic deals with *some* object, without enumerating all objects in a set.

Example: Not all birds can fly

$$\lnot (\forall x \cdot (B(x) \implies F(x)))$$

## Ingredients

First order logic is expressed with the following ingredients

- A non-empty domain of objects (individuals, sets)
- Names of individuals (also called constants)
- Variable denoting generic objects
- Relation (eg: equal, younger)
- Function (eg: +, mother of)
- Quantifiers
- Propositional connectives

A $k$-ary relation is a set of $k$-tuples of domain elements.

Example: Binary relation less-than, over a domain $D$, is represented by the set

$$\{(x,y)\in D^2\, | \, x < y \}$$

**Variables** let us refer to an object without specifying which particular object it is.

In first order logic, functions may be used as arguments to another function.

Example: Every child is younger than its mother.

$$ \forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot ((C(x) \land M(y,x)) \implies Y(x,y))$$

But this allows $x$ to have several mothers as long as $M(y,x)$ is satisfied.

The above example can be rewritten as

$$\forall x \cdot (C(x) \implies Y(x,m(x)))$$

## Syntax

Expressions that have a truth value are **formulas**

Expressions that refer to an object of the domain are called **terms**.

An **atomic formula** is an expression in the form $P(t_1,\dots,t_n)$ such that $P$ is an $n$-ary  function and each $t_i$ is a term.

$\forall x \cdot \alpha$ is a formula if $\alpha$ is a formula, and the formula $\alpha$ is the scope of the quantifier.

## Interpretation

Fix a set $C$ of constant symbols, function symbols, and relation symbols.

An interpretation $M$ for the set $C$ consists of

- A non empty set dom($M$), called the domain of $M$
- For each constant $c$, a member $c^M$ of dom($M$)
- For each function symbol $f^{(i)}$, an iary function $f^M$
- For each relation symbol $R^{(i)}$, an iary function relation $R^M$

An interpretation is also called a **model**.

With an interpretation $M$, for each term $t$ containing no variables, the value of $t$ under interpretation $M$, denoted $t^M$ is

- If $t$ is a constant $c$, $t^M$ is $c^M$
- If $t$ is a function, the value $t^M$ is $f^M(t_1^M,\dots,t_n^M$

The value of a term must always be a member of domain $M$

With an interpretation $M$, for each formula $\alpha$ containing no variables, the value of $\alpha$ under interpretation $M$, denoted $\alpha^M$ is

- If $\alpha$ is $R(t_1,\dots,t_n)$, then $a^M$ is $T$ if $t_1^M,\dots,t_n^M \in R^M$. Else it is $F$
- If $\alpha$ is $\lnot \beta$ or $\beta \star \gamma$, then $\alpha^M$ is determined the same way as for propositional logic.

**Example:** Consider an interpretation $M$ with

- Domain: $N$, the natural numbers
- $0^M$: zero
- $f^M$: successor
- $E^M$: is even

$f(0)^M = 1$, $E(f(0))^M = F$, $E(f(f(0)))^M = T$

**NOTE:** There is NO default meaning for relation, function, or constant symbols. Functions must be defined at every point in the domain.

An occurrence of a variable in a formula is **bound** if it lies in the scope of some quantifier of the variable, otherwise it is **free**.

Example: In the formula $P(x) \land \forall x \cdot Q(x)$, first $x$ is free and last $x$ is bound.

## Substitution

The notation $\alpha \lbrack t/x \rbrack$ for a variable $x$, term $t$, and formula $\alpha$ denotes the formula obtained from $\alpha$ by replacing each free occurrence of $x$ with $t$

**NOTE:** Substitution only affects free variables, not bound occurrences.


## Semantics

In propositional logic, semantics was described in terms of valuations to propositional atoms. FOL includes more ingredients and the semantics must account for them too.

An **environment** is a function that assigns a value in the domain to each variable.

**Example:** With domain $N$, we might have environment $\theta_1$, given by $\theta_1(x) = 9$ and $\theta_1(y)=2$.

## Creating a formula

To create a formula, we must specify the intepretation (includes domain, definition of symbols, and constants) and an environment that maps variables

**Example:** Let $\text{dom}\{J\}$ be the collection of all words over the alphabet $\{a,b\}$

$0^J = a$, $s^J$ is appending $a$ to the end of the string, and $+$ is a concatenation.

$\theta(x) = aba$

Evaluating $(s(s(0) + s(x)))^{(J,\theta)}$ gives $aaabaaa$

## Quantified Formulas

For any environment $]theta$ and domain element $d$, the environment $\theta$ with $x$ reassigned to $d$ is denoted as $\theta \lbrack x \rightarrow d \rbrack$

In this case, $x$ is substituted with $d$ for every quantified occurrence.

Cannot directly say a statement is true for every $x \in dom(M)$, must say $\alpha^{(M,\lbrack x \rightarrow d \rbrack)}$ for every $d \in dom(M)$

**NOTE:** The values of $(\forall x \cdot \alpha)^{(M,\theta)}$  and $(\exists x \cdot \alpha)^{(M,\theta)}$ do not depend on the value of $\theta(x)$ as it only matters for free occurrences.

If $M \vDash_\theta \alpha$ for every $\theta$, then $M$ **satisfies** $\alpha$, denoted $M \vDash \alpha$

## Validity and Satisfiability

A first order formula can be either valid, satisfiable, and unsatisfiable. There are no tautologies in predicate logic.


Suppose $\sigma$ is a set of formulas and $\alpha$ is a formula. $\alpha$ is the **logical consequence** of $\sigma \vDash \alpha$ iff for any interpretation $M$ and environment $\theta$, we have $M \vDash_\theta \sigma$ implies $M \vDash_\theta \alpha$

**Example**: Show that $\forall x \cdot \lnot \gamma \vDash \lnot \exists x \cdot \gamma$

$M \vDash_\theta \forall x \cdot \lnot \gamma$. This means for every $a \in dom(M)$, $M \vDash_{\theta \lbrack x \rightarrow a \rbrack} \lnot \gamma$

By definition, that means for $a \in dom(M)$, $M \not\vDash_{\theta \lbrack x \rightarrow a \rbrack} \gamma$

This means there is no $a \in dom(M)$ that satisfies $M \vDash_{\theta \lbrack x \rightarrow a \rbrack} \gamma$

This is the RHS of the equation as required.

## Proofs in FOL

$\forall$ elimination: $\frac{\forall x \cdot \alpha}{\alpha \lbrack t / x \rbrack}$

$\exists$ introduction: $\frac{\alpha \lbrack t/x \rbrack}{\exists x \cdot \alpha}$

A variable is **fresh** in a subproof if it occurs nowhere outside the box of the subproof.

If you start with $y$ fresh and can conclude $\alpha \lbrack y / x \rbrack$, you can conclude $\forall x \cdot \alpha$

If you start with $\exists x \cdot a$ and when you introduce $u$ fresh you can conclude $\beta$, then you can actually conclude $\beta$

**Definition:** First Order Logic with Equality is First-Order Logic with the restriction that the symbol `=` must be interpreted as equality on the domain

$$(=)^L = \{(d,d) | d \in dom(L)\}$$

If $t = t$, you can do an equals introduction

If $t_1 = t_2$ and $\alpha \lbrack t_1 / x \rbrack$ then you can conclude $\alpha \lbrack t_2 /x \rbrack$

An **axiom** is a premise that is always taken, it need not be listed explicitly.

EQ1: $\forall x \cdot x = x$ is n axiom.

EQ2: For each formula $\alpha$ and variable $z$

$\forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot (x = y \implies (\alpha \lbrack x / z \rbrack \implies \alpha \lbrack y / z \rbrack))$

These axioms then imply symmetry and transitivity.

## Arithmetic, Data Structures, and Programs















-----














































## Relations on Lists

If $x$ is the empty list

$\forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot (x = e) \implies \lnot \text{ First}(x,y)$

$\forall y \cdot \lnot \text { First}(x,y)$

$x$ is not the empty list

$\forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot x \neq e \implies x = cons(y,z)$

$\forall y \cdot \forall z \cdot \text {First}(cons(y,z),y)$

## Append

$\text{Append}(x,y,z)$ represents appending $x$ to $y$ and getting $z$

How do we write this definition in logic?

Case 1: $x$ is the empty list.

$\forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot (x = e \implies \text{ Append}(x,y,y))$

$\forall y \cdot \text{ Append}(e,y,y)$

Case 2: $x$ is not the empty list

$R_{first} (x,v_f) \implies$

$\qquad R_{rest}(x,v_r) \implies$

$\qquad\qquad \text{Append}(v_r,y,v_a) \implies$

$\qquad \qquad \qquad \text{Append}(x,y,cons(v_f,v_a))$

Using this simplification

$a \implies b \implies c \implies d \equiv (a \land b \land c) \implies d$

The above statement may be simplified.

$x \neq e \implies (R_{first} (x,v_f) \land R_{rest}(x,v_r) \land \text{Append}(v_r,y,v_a) \implies \text{Append}(x,y,cons(v_f,v_a))$

$$\forall x \cdot \forall v_f \cdot \forall v_r \cdot \forall y \cdot \forall v_a \cdot (x \neq e \implies (R_{first} (x,v_f) \land R_{rest}(x,v_r) \land \text{Append}(v_r,y,v_a) \implies \text{Append}(x,y,cons(v_f,v_a)))$$

Simplified using BL1 and BL2

$\forall v_r \cdot \forall y \cdot \forall v_a \cdot \forall v_f \cdot (\text{Append}(v_r,y,v_a) \implies \text{ Append}(cons(v_f,v_r),y,cons(v_f,v_a)))$

$\forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot \forall z \cdot \forall w \cdot  (\text{Append}(x,y,z) \implies \text{ Append}(cons(w,x),y,cons(w,z)))$

**Example:** $\text{Append}(x,y)$ is true iff $x$ is a member of $y$

Case 1: Empty lists. $\forall x \cdot \lnot \text{ Member}(x,e)$

Case 2: $\forall x \cdot \forall z \cdot (\text{Member}(x,cons(x,z)))$

$\forall x \cdot \forall w \cdot \forall z \cdot (\text{Member}(x,z) \iff \text{Member}(x,cons(w,z)))$

**Example:** Prove Member$(b, <a,b,c>)$

Member$(b,cons(a, cons(b, cons(c, e))))$

Member$(b, cons(b, cons(c, e)))$

True

**Example:** $\lnot$Member$(b,<a>)$

**Idea:** Start with assuming Member$(b,<a>)$ and reach a contradiction. Therefore assumption is false and can conclude $\lnot$Member$(b,<a>)$

**Example:** Reverse$(x,y)$ is true iff $y$ is the reverse of list $x$.

Case 1: Reverse$(e,e)$ is true. $\forall x \cdot (x \neq e \implies \lnot$Reverse$(x,e) \land \lnot$Reverse$(e,x))$

Case 2: Reverse of a list is the reverse of the rest of the list appended onto the first element.

$\forall w \cdot \forall x \cdot \forall y \cdot \forall z \cdot ($Reverse$(x,y) \land$ Append$(y,cons(w,e),z)) \implies$ Reverse$(cons,w,x),z)))$

Reverse$(cons(b,e),cons(b,e))$

-----

Given terms $t_1, t_2$, determine whether there are substitutions for the variables that make the terms the same. Finding such substitution is called **unification** of the terms.


